Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
the MG by Doctor Paul Penn. He's senior lecturer
in the School of Psychology at the University of
East London. His interests revolve around cognitive psychology and
understanding how we can best use psychological knowledge to
improve the way people learn, communicate, and collaborate. And
today we're focusing on his book, The Psychology of
Effective Studying, How to Succeed in your Degree. So,
Doctor Pen, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure
to have you on.
Thank you for having me, really great, great to
be here.
So perhaps just to introduce the book here, could
you start by telling us what led you to
writing this book? I mean, and what are perhaps
the main goals you had in mind with it?
Yeah, so the, the main reason for writing the
book really was purely because um as a lecturer
I'd seen a lot of and heard a lot
of students expressing a lot of dissatisfaction with studying.
You know, it's common to hear things like, you
know, I love university, but the studying sucks, you
know, and, and part of you as a lecturer
hears that and goes, well, that's kind of why
we're here, to be honest with you. Um, SO
I wondered why that was the case, and then
I started just, you know, um, you know, having
some interviews with students and, and, and looking at
the research, and what I quickly found is that.
A lot of students weren't using approaches to studying
that were informed by psychological research. So they were
using methods of studying that were familiar to them,
um, that felt right for them. But when you
actually compared that with what psychology had to say
on what methods of studying work and what don't,
they were often using very ineffective practice. Um, SO,
you know, and that's a problem across the board,
you know, whether you study of organic chemistry or,
or, or physics, you know, it's not good if
you study and practice aren't informed by what works
and what doesn't. But it's particularly bad for students
of psychology, um, you know, because they're the ones
that are studying, uh, things like attention and memory
and, and so on. So if they're really not
getting it right, um, it, it's a real problem.
So I thought, really what I need to do
is try and produce a book that kind of
can be a uh a con a reasonably concise
and and hopefully. Fairly engaging guide to how psychology
can inform your study practices and ensure that you
study more effectively so that you could find studying
a bit more engaging and and get more out
of your efforts. Basically, I wanted to help people
see things or see studying as something that could
be um enjoyed rather than just endured.
And what does it mean to study effectively?
Mm. Well, I think when when I talk about
effective studying, what I'm actually talking about is the
use of methods that are supported by psychological research.
OK? So what, what I really want there is
for people to be using approaches to studying that
are actually informed by psychology and not informed by,
you know, intuition. Because a lot of times when
people study, they, they, you know. If they reflect
on their study habits at all, they tend to
use what they think works, um, intuitively. And the
problem with our intuition when it comes to what
works and what doesn't, is it's often wrong. And
in the first chapter of the book, that's really
what it's about. It's me trying to dispel certain,
um, if you like, fallacies and, and cognitive biases
and, and. And misconceptions people have about studying, um,
you know, a, a, a good one is that
studying, you know, should be relatively easy, um, and
not especially challenging, and, and if you're really starting
to struggle, then something's going wrong. When in point
of fact, there's, there's a lot of research that
suggests that certain elements of difficulty when you're studying
are actually a very constructive thing. Um, TO overcome,
it's, it's a bit like going to the gym,
you know, if you try and lift a weight
the first time, you might not quite be able
to manage it. Um, BUT you know, you wouldn't
necessarily necessarily regard that as a failure because part
of you knows that what's gonna happen is you're,
you're gonna go home and be a bit sore
for a while and your muscle is gonna rebuild
a little bit stronger and you'll be that more,
much closer to be able to lift the weight
in the future. And your memory actually works in
a in a similar way. um, AND if you're
not struggling and you're not having some retrieval failures,
then you're probably not progressing. Even though it doesn't
feel very good, actually, you know, not being able
to retrieve things as well as being able to
retrieve things is helpful for your progress. Uh, AND
that's quite a difficult thing, I think, for students
to get their head around initially. They just assume
that if it's not, they haven't got it straight
away, then that means they're not going about it
the right way. So when I talk about effective
studying, what I mean is methods of studying that
are informed by the research and not just by
intuition.
So one of the aspects of our psychology that
you focus on in the initial parts of the
book and that seems to be very important in
the context of studying is metacognition. What is metacognition
about? Um, WELL, metacognition, it's in its broadest sense,
it's really just sort of thinking about thinking, which
sounds like a really esoteric or academic in the
worst possible way, uh, thing to say. But really
when you think about it, it's incredibly important because
you are, your, your attempts to study and your
efforts to study are always going to be linked
to your perception of what you know and what
you don't know. So if you're fairly confident in
your, uh, you know, uh, in your knowledge about
a particular topic, there's a good chance you're not
gonna continue to hit the books and um and
and and study that topic. But on the other
hand, if you're not confident in your knowledge about
that subject, there's a good chance you'll be motivated
to hit the books, as it were. Um, THAT'S
all well and good when it goes right, but
the problem with metacognition is often our perception of
what we know and what we don't know and
our perception of how good we are at something,
so our level of competence, often is a little
bit divorced um from the, the reality of the
matter, the objective reality. Um, AND that can be
a problem, particularly when you're starting out, um, on
your journey to, you know, studying a new topic,
for example, um, because what can tend to happen
is when you know a little bit about the
topic, you can get an inflated idea about your
knowledge. Uh, WHEREAS when you know a lot about
the topic, what tends to happen is you start
to get almost like an imposter syndrome. Um, THE
more you learn about something, the more you realize
you don't know, um, you know, which is why
they say a little learning is a dangerous thing.
Um, SOMETIMES, you know, it's, it's when you know
a little bit that you're, you're you're the biggest
risk of kind of having an inflated perception of
actually how much you know.
It is the the Kruger effect and the the
Kruger effect, I mean, in simple terms is just
basically the idea that people who are the least
knowledgeable would tend to be the most overconfident in
terms of what they know about the particular subject.
But is that phenomenon really a thing? Does it
really exist or not?
Yeah, I, I, I think there's, there's not much,
you know, I think debate in the research about
whether it exists. So, so the Dunny Kruger effect,
I think, as you're alluding to here really, is
that you are at the most risk of having
an inflated perception of how much you know, um,
when, when you know the least, basically, when you
just know a little bit. And the same for
perception of how skilled you are as well. You're,
you're at the greatest danger of thinking you're more
skilled than you actually are when you are, you
know, the least skilled, as it were. Um, SO.
I don't think there's too much debate about whether
it actually exists. I think there's, there's pretty much
universal agreement about there does seem to be a,
a gap between perceived ability or perceived knowledge and
actual ability and actual knowledge, and that tends to
be the biggest when you're, you know, on the
start of your learning or skill acquisition journey. I
think what the debate tends to be about is
what causes it. Uh, AND there are, there are
those of us that probably believe that it is,
it's a metacognitive failing. So we would probably argue
that the reason that you are most vulnerable to
having an inflated perception of how good you are
or how knowledgeable you are when you know a
little bit, is because you, you don't really have
the skills at that point to evaluate your level
of knowledge. It's the same skills or that you
need to be good at something, for example, that
you need to evaluate how good you are. So,
you know. WHEN you're, when you're new to something,
you just, you know, the ignorance is a double-edged
sword. You're not very good at something, but you
lack the, the knowledge to know you're not very
good at it. Um, WHEREAS as you get more
proficient, um, what tends to happen is your awareness
of just how little you know tends to expand.
So what is not known to you expands on
the horizon much more rapidly than what. Is known.
Uh, BUT that takes a little bit of engagement
with the topic or engagement with the skill acquisition
to kind of figure out. And then when you
get to the other end of the spectrum, what
tends to happen is, as you become an expert,
your knowledge becomes so detailed and so nuanced, and
your awareness of what you don't yet know, uh,
expands at such a rate that you, you almost
feel like you know nothing. So it's, it's a
really strange thing that sometimes the more knowledgeable you
become, the the less you perceive the progress that
you've made, because the, the double-edged sword is that
as you become more knowledgeable, you also become more
aware about the things that you don't know. So
that's one explanation, it's kind of a metacognitive quirk.
Um, AND one of the other explanations that's been
put forward, um, and has led to some people
being, I think, quite dismissive of the Dunning-Kruger effect
is that it's a al artifact of some kind
like a regression to the mean effect. Um, BUT
I, I'm, I'm not sure the, the, the research
is, is ready to make a definitive comment on,
on, on that yet. My feeling is it's, it's,
it, I don't, I don't, not entirely convinced by
it being a statistical artifact. Um, THE, the, the
idea of it being, um, the fact that you're,
you're not knowledgeable enough to know what. You don't
yet know seems a much more plausible explanation to
me, but I think the jury is still out,
but I think whichever side you tend to go
on, the fact that you are the most at
risk of er an inflated perception of your knowledge
when you are the least knowledgeable is a fairly
uncontentious thing to say, really.
And when it comes to studying, does the ability
to remember something equate uh understanding it, I mean,
is it the same as understanding it or not?
Um, NO, I, I think quite often people make
the mistake of, uh, of kind of conflating knowledge
and understanding, or at least recall and understanding. Um,
SO one of the, um, one of the things
that I mention in the book is, um, a
study that looks at, well, how would you go
about distinguishing understanding. FROM, um, recall. So one of
the ways you could do that, for example, um,
is to look at contradictions and whether people spot
contradictions, because to spot a contradiction, you, you have
to know something about the topic, to know that
two things can't logically, um, you know, exist at
the same time. You have to have some degree
of understanding. Um, SO this study was, was looking
at undergraduates and, uh, it was looking at their
ability to recall the passage of text. And what
they did at one point is they, they got
the students to try and read this passage of
text. And then at the end of it, they,
um, they said to them, OK, um, gave you
a, gave you a, we'll give you a test
now on the contents of this passage. But we'll
also look at whether, um, you can spot contradictions
in the text or not. And the students were
actually warned that the texts would contain or might
contain contradictions right from the start, and as it
happened, the contradictions were always in the same place.
I think it was towards the end of the
passage, the last sentence or penultimate sentence. Um, SO
what you'd hope there is, is if students, you
know, did the test and could recall parts of
the passage, and they claim to understand it, what
you'd also hope is that they would spot the
contradictions. Um, WHAT you'd hope wouldn't happen is they
would claim to understand it and then miss the
contradictions cos that then implies they didn't. Uh, AND
what they found is students were often claiming about
50% of the cases, I think. Students were often
claiming that they understood a passage of text, but
were then completely oblivious to the contradictions it claimed.
So the, the kind of irritating thing in some
ways about um the difference between I suppose knowledge
and understanding or the ability to recall something and
understand it, is it it's possible to be able
to recall information without understanding it. Um, BUT you
know, it's, it's not essential, you don't have to
understand that to be able to recall it. But
once you do understand something, that is a massive
aid to your memory. And indeed, a lot of
the methods of studying that we advocate tend to
promote things like self explanation. So rather than just
trying to um reproduce an explanation of something, you
have to explain it in your own words. So
actually that process of trying to disassemble something and
put it back together again. And come to an
understanding of how it works and explaining it in
your own words is a really powerful aid to
memory, but unfortunately it doesn't work the other way
round, just cos you can recall something doesn't mean
necessarily that you understand it. And I think that's
something that students often, uh, tend to get wrong.
And, and it might be one of the reasons
why that one of the things that students often
struggle with is things like critical evaluation as well,
because they, they, they've recalled a piece of information,
so the assumption is, well, I must have some
critical faculty with this information or understanding of this
information when in point of fact, they they, they
don't really.
Is self-testing an effective study strategy?
Uh, YEAH, it, it, it's a very, um, effective
study strategy. It's probably the, one of the few
things in psychology that is, is very uncontentious. If
you, if you talk about things like the testing
effect, which is, which is what the, the method
of um self testing is based on. So the
testing effect simply says that um if you have
a period of studying. Um, IT'S, it, if you,
um, read a passage of text, for example, and
then you test yourself repeatedly for a given period
of time, your, your memory for that material will
be superior than if you just reread that text
over and over again. Um, AND it's, uh, initially,
I think sometimes there's a bit of skepticism about
that because people say, well, that's just learning to
the test and things like that. But actually it
it's not because the researchers looked at this and
it doesn't matter whether the, the, you know, the
questions you use to test yourself are the same
that appear in a final test or different, um,
sometimes they can assess a different application of the
knowledge. Um, IT just seems that the process of
trying to assess whether you can recall something is
a very powerful metacognitive aid. Because what it does
is it takes the guesswork out of um your
perception of what you know and what you don't
know. um BECAUSE sometimes you can get an illusory
impression of what you know. So if you're rereading
something over and over again, for example, what can
happen there is the, the material will subjectively start
to feel familiar to you. But the problem is
with that is that you haven't taken into account
that the conditions of learning, so you're learning with
the source available to you all the time, are
not going to match up with the conditions of
recall, uh, where the source probably won't be available
to you. Um, SO that impression you get of
familiarity and rereading something repeatedly is illusory and will
most likely evaporate as soon as you don't have
the source in front of you. Now, the good
thing about self-testing, as long as you're doing it,
you know, not cheating, as it were, and looking
at the source, is that it gives you a
much more objective idea of what you know and
what you don't know. And when you have a
more objective and. Your idea of what you know
and what you don't know, you can orientate your
future studying, um, in a much more kind of
precise and productive manner. So rather than then, you
know, just rehearsing everything again, you're actually sort of
focusing in on the material where, you know, you've
had those retrieval failures. Uh, AND again, as we,
we alluded to earlier, um, one of the, the,
the things that makes self test. In work is
the fact that retrieval failure, so, you know, not
quite being able to remember something, despite the fact
it doesn't feel very good subjectively, it's actually very
useful for your memory. Um, YOU know, it is,
it's, it's very much what you remember tends to
be the, the effort that you put into processing
that information, particularly if you start investing effort into
thinking about that information. So, so self testing is,
is, is incredibly um important um and it, it's
probably the, the one piece of advice that I
would, you know, if you could give them no
other advice, this is what I would say to
students. It's, it's not what you think you know,
um, that matters. It's what you condemn. THAT you
know. And you should view self testing, so I,
I emphasize the word self testing here, so very
low stakes self administered tests. You should view that
as part of the process of learning, not just
do something that you do at the end of
learning.
So let's now talk a little bit about procrastination,
because that's something that students worry a lot about
and even people at work and in other sorts
of contexts. So how does procrastination work and why
does it seem that we tend to fall into
it so easily?
Yeah, it does seem sometimes, doesn't it, that it's
just something we just never learn from perpetually suffer
with it. Um, PROCRASTINATION, I think it's been described
as the kind of quintessential self-regulation failure. Um, AND
the reason we fall for it easily and sometimes
we repeatedly do it. Um, IT'S because we don't
really necessarily understand what causes it. Not, not researchers.
We're, we're starting to get to grips with it,
but for the layperson, it's just something that's an
incredible nuisance that's a scourge on their lives, and
no matter how much they might, um, tell themselves
off after the last bout of procrastination, they just
can't seem to kick it, as it were. Um,
SO I think making people aware of, of some
of the drivers of procrastination is really important, and
there are two aspects of cognition that are particularly
important when it comes to thinking about, uh, procrastination.
One is what we call hyperbolic discounting. And this
just means that we tend to prefer doing things
that will give us small rewards, but they'll they'll,
they'll generate those rewards very quickly, so very soon
in the near future, than we do, um, we
prefer that to engaging with bigger things, more complicated
tasks that will give us much bigger rewards, but
that the rewards are much more distant. Um, AND
the problem for that for people that are studying,
obviously, is, is most of the things, most of
the rewards you'll get as a student, are located
at some point in some hypothetical future. You know,
if I, if I invest that time doing this
essay now in 2 or 3 years' time, you
know, I'll, I'll get a degree, as it were,
hopefully a good degree. So that's something, that's why
one of the reasons why procrastinationism is a problem
for students. It's because of this sort of hyperbolic
discounting tendency. Um, BUT hyperbolic discounting also has a,
uh, if you like a. A brother at arms
or enabler, and it's called the planning fallacy, and
the planning fallacy um refers to the fact that
we're not very good at estimating how long things
will take and, Anyone that's probably had builders in
will, will, will be an expert on this already,
sorry to all the builders out there. Um, BUT
we tend to, you know, grossly underestimate how long
things will take to do. And this is particularly
true of, of, of students who often have very
complicated tasks that, you know, are, are, are extremely
involved and occur over quite a long period of
time. And indeed some of the research that's been
done on this has been uh done asking students
to estimate how long it will take them to
do their final year dissertation. And the kind of
research that's done will will approach students and say
to them, OK, I want, I want 3 estimates
from you now. All of them relate to how
long it will take you to do your final
destination, uh, dissertation. Um, THE first estimate I want
you to give me is your best case scenario.
So if everything that can go right does go
right, how long is it gonna take? The second,
um, scenario is, you know, the exact opposite, which
is assume that everything that could go wrong does
go wrong, how long do you think it will
take then? So a pessimistic estimate. And the third
thing is, OK, just tell us now, what's your
most accurate guess, you know, uh, all things going
well, all things going badly be damned. How long
do you actually think it's gonna take? And then
obviously what you can do is after the students
completed their dissertation, you can compare how long it
actually took them to how long they um anticipated
it would take in their three estimates. And what
that research found was that students were underestimating how
long it took, even in relation to their most,
you know, um, pessimistic, um, sod law case scenario
of everything that can go wrong will go wrong.
I think by about 30% as well. So the,
the problem, it's a bit of a double whammy
there because, you know, we, we tend to leave
things to the last minute, as it were, and
we don't realize that things can't really be done
at the last minute and we need longer than
we think. Um, SO those are two things that,
that make procrastination, I think, particularly difficult because they're,
they're kind of baked into our psychology, really, these
two things.
Uh, AND apart from these more general tendencies that
I would imagine everyone shares when it comes to
procrastination, is, does it have anything to do with
individual differences? Are there, for example, people that are,
that have a higher tendency to procrastinate than others,
perhaps because of their personality traits, for example?
Um, IT'S kind of, it's. All the people think
that, I think. Um, THERE is some relationship with
individual differences insofar as when you look at the
interaction between the task that someone's procrastinating on and
the way that the person perceives that task. So
for example, the, in terms of sort of affect,
the sort of three reliable predictors of procrastination, uh,
and none of these will surprise you. One of
them is boredom, so we procrastinate on things that
we find boring. Um, ANOTHER thing is resentment. We
procrastinate on things that we resent doing. And the
final thing is frustration. We tend to procrastinate if
we find something frustrating. And, and if you can
imagine, if you're the, if you're a student at
the moment who is not really enjoying studying cos
you're not going about it the right way, the
chances are you're gonna find studying boring, you're gonna
resent doing it, and it's gonna be frustrating when
you don't get the results you think you should
be getting. Which is why procrastination can be a
real issue for students. But. In terms of personality
traits, the answer really is no, not directly. There
isn't a smoking gun, uh, in terms of a
particular personality type, that means you'll either be completely
predi predisposed towards procrastination or a personality type that
means you're completely, you know, immune from it. Um,
THERE are some elements of certain personality traits. So
for example, if you're an extrovert, one element of
that might be, um, that you have a high
degree of impulsivity. Um, AND that might make you
a little bit more prone to procrastination. Equally, if
you're perhaps high in conscientiousness, things like your, your
resistance to, um, uh, I suppose temptation, your resistance
to being distracted, um, might, might, might, you know,
put you in good stead when it comes to
resisting procrastination. But there isn't really a personality trait
that you could just point out and say it's
that one, as it were. Unfortunately it's something that
that all personality types can struggle with, um, you
know, um, not necessarily equally, but certainly to varying
extents.
And for people who tend to struggle a lot
with procrastination, what would you say are perhaps some
of the best strategies, science-based strategies that can, they
can try to apply?
Yeah, so there's a few things here. Um, ONE
of them, well, let, let's actually, let's try and
relate these back to some of the things we've
talked about previously. So, um, in terms of, um,
the planning fallacy, where we said that people tend
to underestimate how long it will take to do
something, uh, fairly significantly, um, one thing that we
know from research there, and this is one thing
where you're. Your parents will laugh because it's something
they'll probably have always advised you to do and
now science backs them up, as it were. Um,
IS that the, the only thing that seems to
work reliably when it comes to defeating the planning
fallacy is to, at the point you're considering doing
a task, and maybe planning for the amount of
time it will take, um, is to break that
task down very explicitly into its component parts. So
let's take an example with students here. Um, IF
you had an essay to do, for example, and
you want, you know, your calendar and you left
yourself 3 days to do it, um, if your
to do list, if you like, is #1, write
essay, and #2, end of list, then 3 days
might look like a perfectly reasonable amount of time
to, to dedicate to that task. There's probably people
listening now that are going. And blimey, 3 days,
how about 24 hours or the night before it's
due in, you know. But if you then consider
what that task actually entails, and you think, OK,
well, I've got to retrieve the right course notes,
I've got, you know, pop to the library, uh,
and retrieve the right materials. I've got to do
a preliminary scan of these materials to make sure
that they're relevant. I've got to discard the ones
that aren't relevant and start reading the ones. In
more detail that are relevant. I've then got to
produce an essay plan. I've then got to think
about the narrative, um, you know, of that essay,
not just the contents. Um, I've got to draft
it probably a couple of times. I've got to
leave a bit of time, then I've got proofread
it. And you can imagine that list getting bigger
and bigger and bigger. And suddenly that same period
of time of 3 days just doesn't look like
it's gonna cut it anymore. So it's what we
call unpacking, that's just a, it's not really a
technical term, is it? But that's what it's called
in the literature, unpacking. Uh, AND that seems to
work reasonably reliably in, if not completely negating, um,
the, the, the planning fallacy, certainly reducing its magnitude.
So that's one thing that you can do to,
uh, remove that. Now, in terms of hyperbolic discounting,
this, this thing that we, we tend to prefer
doing smaller things that give us small but immediate
rewards over bigger things that give us big but,
you know, um, deferred rewards. One of the things
you can do there. If you've broken down the
task into its component parts, is you can just
arrange to actually reward yourself after those little component
parts. So the rewards are much more frequent um
than they would be if you just said I've
got to do an entire essay and the reward's
gonna have to wait till the end of it.
So that, that unpacking the task has two benefits,
one in that it tends to negate the planning
fallacy, but also in that you can then, if
you just, you know, view each task as a
checkpoint and incorporate a reward at the end of
that, um, you know, that, that's actually a really
good way of dealing with hyperbolic discounting too. The
other thing which, um, most people scoff at because
they don't think that it will work, um, is
what we call implementation intentions. And that's just a
a a bit of a fancy term and all
it means is that if you look at the
research on, on things like motivation, um, what it
will often tell you is that, um, as humans,
we're often better at specifying our goals, i.e. what
we want to achieve. So you've probably heard people
say, you know, I want to get fit or
I wanna develop some muscle mass or whatever else,
you know. We're much better at doing that than
we are specifying the behavior required to achieve those
goals. Uh, AND what this often leads to is
what we call the intention action gap. Um, YOU
know, so you know the new year where everyone
makes good, um, New Year's intentions, and then none
of them really come to pass. Well, the reason
is they specified the goal or the desired outcome,
but they haven't specified the behavior required to reach
that goal. So, and it's very, very doing it
actually specifying the behavior is actually very, very simple.
And there was a wonderful study once which illustrated
this, and uh they essentially invited undergraduates into a
lab to do a study. And the study was
actually just a ruse, it was neither here nor
there, it was a distraction task. The relevant bit
of the experiment occurred at the end. Um, THEY
divided the participants into one of two groups. In
um in one group, the participants were given a
sign up sheet, um, just with a series of,
you know, er er space for them to put
their name and then a space for them to
specify a time. And the reason for that is
the experimenter said, thanks very much for taking part
in this study. Would you mind taking part in
a future study? Uh, THEN the person would sign
up. And that was the first group. The second
group, they got the same sign up sheet, but
the wording was changed slightly, and it was along
the lines of if you commit to attending the
second study at a particular time now, then you
are more likely to show up at this time.
Um, AND then what they did, obviously, is they
compared the two groups in terms of, um, how
many people actually showed up for the second part
of the study. And the difference between the two
groups was, was massive, you know, I think it
was about 60% showed up for the second that
were in the if you uh put your name
down, then you will turn up compared to something
like about 13%, um, in the group that were
just, you know, please sign up for the next
study. And that language of if and then is
actually really important. And the, as weird as it
sounds, the reason it's important is because at at
some level, we, we're always looking for cues in
our environment about what we should, you know, what,
what's the cue of the particular behavior. So if
this happens, then I should do this. And a
lot of behavior at its basic level can be
broken down in that fashion. So to increase the
chances of you doing something in a timely fashion,
what you need to do is set yourself an
implementation intention to do that particular task. So it
could be like, you know, if it's Monday at
6 o'clock, um, then I will immediately proceed to
do the, you know, start on the essay for
this module that I'm studying. Um, OBVIOUSLY, depending on
what your goals are and what the task is,
you'll have to be more specific. ME, but the
key thing there is saying if that's the condition
that alerts you to the fact that there is
a, a, a, a trigger for the behavior, and
then, which is what associates the behavior required to
achieve the goals with that trigger. So that's what
you need to just get in the habit of
doing. Um, AND it, it's a remarkably simple, uh,
but remarkably powerful strategy. For trying to close that,
you know, intention and action gap. So that's what
I always recommend to people, it's you've got to
get good at specifying not just the goal that
you'd like to achieve, you know, saying I've got
to get the essay done, but you've gotta specify
what the cue in the environment will be to
make a start on that task, and then also
um what the associated behavior will be that will
contribute to the resolution of that task. Um, THE
great thing about, um, getting started as well is
that once you've started a task, it's much easier
to keep going because your memory is kind of
biased towards, um, reminding you uncomfortably, and we'll all
have had this experience that, you know, 2 o'clock
in the morning when you wake up in a
panic and remember all the things you were supposed
to do. You haven't yet done, your memory is
actually biased to remind you about the stuff you've
yet to do. Um, YOU kind of sweep aside
fairly quickly the stuff that's already done. Um, SO
just getting the implementation in, in place and actually
starting, uh, on the road to achieving that goal
can be a, a really good thing to do.
So there's a few things that, that you can
do that are, that are backed up by research
that, that negate these tendencies that we have to
procrastinate.
So changing topics now is something that students also
do a lot, not only in class, but also
when they're studying alone at home or in the
library, for example, is they take notes. What the
science tell us about the most effective ways of
taking notes and is, for example, taking notes verbatim
good enough or not?
Um, I, I think the, the first thing about
note taking is you should probably ask when it's
being done, um, because one of the things that
will often happen is if you're a lecturer, for
example, or even a student, you look around the
room, what you might see is people, you know,
spending an entire lecturer just trying to scribble down
everything the lecturer says, you know, and, and self-evidently.
That's really not gonna help. So I, I, I
think really when you're in a lecture, what your
focus should be on is actually attending to the
lecture itself. Uh, IF not for another reason the
lectures are often recorded these days and the slides
available, so there's really no point in just madly
scribbling down, um, what the lecturer says. Now when
it comes to notes, I, I think um one
thing that you really can do um is start
off by narrowing down the, the process of reading.
So when you take notes, you generally take it
on what you read. And a good way of
improving the notes is also narrowing down your reading.
Because I always say to students that look, you
need to start off with some questions, because if
you don't have any questions, the source you're reading
by definition can't give you any answers. So just
reading and taking notes aimlessly is is is very
inefficient and and and rather pointless. So, you know,
it might be, for example, that you're reading a
particular study and the questions you'd like to answer
is, You know, how was this study done and
what were the main findings and maybe what were
the implications. So just start off with some idea
about what you'd like to get from the source,
because immediately what you're then doing is you're interrogating
the source for that information, rather than just blankly
reading it. And then what you're doing is when
you're taking notes, you're taking the salient notes down
rather than just trying to capture everything. So that's,
I, I think a good um a good first
approach. I think the other thing um to do
is when you're taking notes, avoid any kind of
um verbatim copying, because I think some people mistake
activity for progress in this respect and they think,
what I'll do is I'll just copy out the
relevant bits and just the, the action of me
typing this out or writing this down will somehow
enhance my memory. And I hate to break it
to you, I know it feels like busy work
and it feels like it should work, but it
really doesn't. Um, YOU know, copying stuff verbatim is
no more effective than just rereading it, which itself
is, isn't particularly effective. So, um, what I would
say there is avoid, um, copying things verbatim. If
you're going to commit anything to paper, what it
really should be is your understanding of that material.
So, and this really relates to, um, I, I
don't know if we've got questions about this later,
but this relates to how your memory works in
that your memory isn't reproductive in nature. I, I
know it feels like it sometimes but it, it,
it feels like it's some, you know, old Victorian
camera where you have to point it at something
for about an hour. And if anything moves in
the source or the frame, you know, that it's
ruined and. Gotta start from scratch. But if you're
trying to study like that, that's why you're not
having much success, because your memory isn't really designed
to reproduce information verbatim. What it's there is to
create meaning, and it's there, and because it's there
to create meaning, what it wants you to do
is to reconstruct the information, so it's reconstructed in
nature. Not reproductive. So the question when it comes
to things like note taking is, how do you
take advantage of the reconstructive nature of memory? And
one of the really good ways to do that
is by trying to explain things in your own
words. So one of the approaches that gets some
attention and it is reasonably well supported by the
research is to use elaborative interrogation. So the idea
is that as you're reading a source, you start
to annotate that source with some questions to yourself.
And then you have to answer those questions using
the source, but you have to articulate it in
your own words. So what that means is you're
basically thinking about the material and how you would
explain it rather than just trying to regurgitate what
someone else is saying. And as anyone that plays
an instrument will know, it's much easier to remember
your own composition than to remember the composition of
someone else. Uh, AND the reason because of that
is that when you think about it, I think
Daniel Willingham had a beautiful quote about memory, and
he said that memory is the residue of thought.
And I think that's a lovely way of of
of kind of getting it across to people what
you have to do to be able to remember
things. Um, YOU can't just stare at them, you
can't just passively look at them. You've got to
engage with them and you've got to use methods
that force you to explain and to elaborate and
to interrogate and to think. Because what you tend
to put the most effort into thinking about really
determines what you remember. It's not just about duration.
Or repetition, um, it's really about investing effort into
thinking. So I think in summary, what you need
to do is start by narrowing down what you're
reading, what you're taking notes on, um, have some
questions in mind, um, interrogate the text with respect
to those questions, and then try and explain the
key points in your own words. Um, I, I,
I, I kind of emphasize the word explain because
explanation. Tends to trump things like description. Um, JUST
describing something, um, it's OK, particularly if you're describing
your own words, but if you really want to
understand something, understanding the workings of it by explaining
it are, are much more kind of productive. It's
a bit like the difference between distinction we kind
of raised earlier between being able to recall something
and understanding it. Often if you like, the division
bell between that is can you explain it or
not, OK? Mhm.
So perhaps somewhat related to note taking this summarization
work?
Um, RIGHT, summarization things like summarization and highlighting, um,
the, well, summarization first, the material is a little
bit, um, um, I, I don't know, it's, it's,
it's a bit kind of both ways when it
comes to summarization, and I think the reason for
that is that it, whether it works depends on
how good you are at it. And to a
certain extent, the same thing is true at highlighting.
The problem here um becomes the fact that the
people that tend to rely on things like summarization
and highlighting the most are often the least skilled
at using it. Um, SO what, what you'll often
find there is, um, we'll just jump to highlighting
as an example, people will, will highlight way too
much. And they won't really put much thought into
what they're highlighting, which is a problem because the
research that has shown an effect of highlighting, um,
tends to indicate that it's, it's not the highlighting
per se, it's the amount of thought that's gone
into why something is highlighted. Um, THAT tends to
produce the result. Now, with summarization again, the danger
is that you can either completely overegg the pudding
and just write, you know, a huge essay on
a topic that only really needs a few sentences,
or you could completely undershoot and not give enough
information for that summary to be useful. So I
think as a starting strategy, summarization is perhaps a
little bit risky. I, I would tend to steer
people towards things like elaborate, uh, elaborative interrogation and
retrieval practice. Um, THERE are ways around it. So,
for example, in psychology, when we're talking about, um,
study. AND students want to try and remember what
a study is. One way of making your summaries
more effective is to have a mental template of
things you need to cover. So for any study,
if you want to summarize it, you probably need
something about why that study was done, something about
how it was done, what the main finding was,
and then what the implications of that finding is.
So, um, once you, you get reasonably practiced at
doing that, uh, and you can audit the quality
of your summaries, it becomes more effective. But I
think a safer way is to focus on things
like retrieval practice. And, um, you can use, like,
we'll probably come into this a bit later, perhaps
3R method, um, as well. So like this might
be your next question actually. Ricardo, so I'll, I'll,
um, should I cover this now or just leave
it for the moment and come back to it?
Uh, YES, I was just going to say that
just to close off this section and then for
us to talk about things like academic integrity and
some other related topics in the book, you, uh,
talk about the 3R method, read recite review. So
could you explain?
Yeah, absolutely. Well, this is a really nice um
er relatively simple and organic way of incorporating retrieval
practice, um elaborative interrogation. And this idea of repetition,
but doing it very proposively, you know, actually having
that, that mental effort required to retrieve memories uh
and putting effort into doing those things. Um, SO
what you do, uh, it's, it's really simple. First
of all, unfortunately, there's no way around this, you
are gonna have to read the material. But the,
the key thing to note here is you do
need to read in small chunks. One of the
mistakes that students often make is they'll try and
read an entire book chapter or um. An entire
article in one go, and that's really no good.
You, you, you won't be able to recall the,
the, the important parts of that just particularly with
one pass, it will be very frustrating for you.
A good strategy instead is to take the piece
apart and put it into chunks. So one way
of doing that might be to look at it,
break it down into paragraphs. And what you do
is then for every paragraph, you read it, um,
you put it to one side and then you
try and recite, um, either verbally or I, I
tend to prefer typing, um, what I, what I
can recall out because that then becomes the basis
for your notes. Um, YOU try and type out
with the source out of sight, it's very important
you don't look at the source when you're doing
this. You try and recite the main points of
that particular part of the source. And that's really
important because what you're not trying to do is
to recreate that source verbatim. You're not trying to
remember every single word of that passage of text.
Um, YOU just want to remember the important point
and you just want to get your facts straight,
so you're factually accurate. So, having done that, what
you'll then need to do is to audit what
you've written against the source again. Um, SO that's
the review part of the equation. So you take
your source and you put it back in IShot
and then you compare what you've written to the
actual details of the source. But here's the thing,
once again, you're not trying to compare what you've
written, um, and asking yourself things like, is it
as detailed as the original? Is it as eloquent
as the original author? What you're, what you're audited
in your, your recitation. 4 is, have I captured
the main point or points? Have I captured it
in my own words, and is it accurate? And
that's it. Once you can do that, and it
will probably take a few goes, um, you know,
I think people expect success too quickly, and it
goes back to that, um, analogy we used earlier
about, um, retrieval practice being a bit like going.
To the gym, um, you know, it's, it's the
failure to retrieve is helpful as well as the
successful retrievals. But what you do is you should
repeat that process of reading, reciting, and reviewing until
you're satisfied that you can, um, recall the crux
of that passage of text accurately. And once you
do that, you then move on to the next
part of the document and you rinse and repeat.
And if you do that, um, what basically happens
then is you are, you're naturally incorporating, um, asking
questions to the text, um, trying to retrieve answers,
um, elaborative interrogation cos you're trying to explain things
and articulate things in your own words, and you're
getting that kind of practice in as well, that
repetition. So it's a really nice way um of
studying and incorporating those good practice elements that we
talked about into a kind of simple study strategy.
So moving on then to the topic of academic
integrity, I am curious, why was it that you
decided to include such a topic in the book
about the psychology of effective uh studying? Why do
you think it is important?
Yeah, well, it's important for a couple of reasons
really. I mean, the first, the first reason is
that academic integrity is, is kind of fundamentally important
because it relates basically to concepts like fairness and
honesty. Um, WHEN you're studying, uh, and I thought
those were things that from an ethical point of
view, um, needed to be covered. But there's quite
an interesting study from psychology actually, because this is
one area of studying where people tend to be
a bit overconfident, um, in their knowledge of basic
concepts like, you know, what is citation, what is
referencing, what's the difference between citation and quotation. Um,
AND the problem is, overconfidence in this respect can
be very costly because you could end up with,
you know, breach of regulations and being called in
for the university equivalent of disciplinary action. So, obviously
we want students to be able to avoid that.
But from, from an effective studying point of view,
um, the reason it's there is because what you
find is that one of the reasons that people,
um, might plagiarize things, um, is that they've used
ineffective methods of studying, such as verbatim note taking.
So let's run through an example just to illustrate
this. Um, IF your approach to note taking is
that you, um, you write down the words of
another author verbatim, and obviously at that point you
are not intending for that material to find its
way into your essay. The problem is, um, what
can happen over time, particularly if you put those
notes away and you come back to them perhaps
a couple of months later, is you get kind
of a source of monitoring confusion whereby, You misattribute
where that information comes from. So rather than saying,
OK, these notes are clearly from another source, these
are not my words, it's perfectly possible, particularly if
you've been thinking about that information in the interim.
To misattribute those words and think, OK, actually I
think I did produce that. And then of course
that that verbatim copy and it ends up in
your essay and you get into hot water. And
that isn't really, um, any, a reflection on any
deliberate dishonesty on the on the student's part. It's
just an ineffective method of studying. That is conducive
to um to an academic integrity offense. So one
way that you can really reduce the chance of
you ever getting into any trouble whatsoever when it
comes to academic integrity is just by using effective
methods of studying. So if we look at a
positive case study now, if you make notes by
always explaining things in your own words, asking questions
in the text, explaining things in your own words,
then whether those notes make it into your essay
or not is irrelevant because it's in your words
then. So as long as you're giving credit to
the person who originally had the idea with the
citation, it's, it's pretty much impossible for you to
go wrong. So, in, in some ways, good studying
habits are also good academic integrity habits. Um, ANOTHER
example is procrastination. We talked about this earlier. The
research and academic integrity and, and why students sometimes
fall foul of it is that they do something
at the last minute because they put it off
and put it off, and suddenly they've had to
use some fairly dubious practices just to get the
essay done. Um, SO, no. Knowing about things like
how to beat procrastination, how to study effectively, um,
there are, there are very clear links between that
knowledge and also learning how to be what, cos
we, we call it academic integrity, but I think
I'd prefer to it as knowing how to be
an ethical academic, uh, and, and someone who behaves
ethically in the idea of knowledge production and knowledge
dissemination, which anyone in academia really should be, you
know, on board with a cigar.
So what would you say are perhaps the most
important pieces of advice for people to follow when
they're writing assessments at degree level?
OK, so I think um. There's a few things
to note, um, uh, and this was interesting because
this was the one chapter of the book. I,
you know, it's, it's interesting you picked out on
why is the, the section on, um, uh, on,
um, academic integrity there, cos the, the question I
usually get is, is, what could you possibly hope
to say about academic, um, you know, completing assessments
at degree level, given that you're talking to students
of all disciplines from all types of institutions and
across many different types of assessment. Um, WELL, the
honest answer is, is that they're, again, much in
the same way as the first chapter when I
talk about metacognitive problems and how they can lead
to an effective studying practices. Similar metacognitive problems can
also create problems when you're writing. So the first
thing that students often, um, fall foul of when
they're doing an assessment is not being clear on
what the expectations are. And this often refers to
kind of, you know, this illusion of knowledge that
we might have touched upon earlier. Where they mistake
being able to recall, let's say part of the
marking criteria for understanding the marking criteria. So, you
know, you may, you may see something in your
marking criteria that says one of the things that
you're assessed against in your essay is your use
of evidence. And you think, OK, well I can
recall use of evidence, that's really important, therefore, you
know, I've got it. But do you know what
a a a good exemplar of using evidence looks
like? Um, COULD you recognize that in a piece
of work? Could you compare your own work to
that good exemplar and, and figure out if you've
done it right. If you've done it wrong. If
you've done it wrong, could you use the good
exemplar as a way of improving your practice? These
are all questions you should be asking yourself when
it comes to determining whether you really understand what
the expectations are, as opposed to whether you can
just repeat them, as it were, because you know
what the criteria is. Um, SO that's the first
thing that students go wrong. I, I try and
address that in the, um, in that chapter on
on producing assessments in my book. The other thing
that that students need to know about um is
that the one thing that students go wrong with
across the board is they'll often prioritize what's kind
of um expedience over what's relevant. And what I
mean by that, particularly in in the days of
Google searches, is that people will, you know, they'll
they'll Google the topic of their essay. And then
they'll end up with um a, you know, a
list of of returns from Google, and they'll they'll
they'll go to one of the top rated returns
basically. Without thinking about that, the Google hasn't evaluated
your request with how suitable it is for your
essay, it's just giving you a list of what
the most popular returns are, what's the most searched
or what, what people end up on the most,
which is why you always end up with Wikipedia
and things like that. Um, SO what you tend
to get there operating are things like, you know,
the availability bias. So we, we tend to reca,
we tend to use things in our essays that
are just easy and ready to recall, rather than
the things that are the most relevant. And that
kind of availability bias, you know, it's um, it's
compounded by the algorithms that are used online because
what it's effectively doing is sort of shoving something
under our nose that's popular. Um, AND we then
use it because we haven't really thought beyond the
fact, well this is popular, but is it optimal
for answering the particular essay question that had been
said? So that's kind of an indication of where
students go wrong there. It's kind of called it
expediency based practice. So rather than evaluating contents for
their their worth in terms of the, the assessment
concerned, they just tend to go for the things
that are most available. Um, THE other thing which
is always interesting is if you ask students who
they're writing for, and they'll often tell you, well,
I, I'm writing for my tutor, obviously. And of
course, in, in a practical way they are because
the tutor is the person that marks their work.
But in a very real way, what they're demonstrating
there is vulnerability is something called the curse of
knowledge, because if you're writing for a tutor. What's
probably gonna happen are two things. One is at
that point you would probably have studied that material,
and the, the dangerous thing is once we've studied
something, we tend to look back at that knowledge
as much more obvious as it is. That's kind
of, you know, the hindsight bias, basically. Um, ONCE
we know something, we can't unknow it, and it
just seems more obvious. That's why when you're watching
a game show sometimes, and a contestant is on
there and they get a question that you know
the answer to, and the contestants I'm in and
ah in, um, you tend to get really annoyed
and start shouting at the TV. Um, IT'S because
you can't break free of your own. YOU know
it, so it's obvious to you, um, but the
poor contestant doesn't share your knowledge, um, and you
can't see that, um, and that's where the kind
of curse of knowledge comes in. You can't, we
tend to assume that people at the same level
of understanding that we are. Now the problem for
this when you're writing an essay, is that if
you think something is obvious, how likely are you
to explain it in the essay? Probably not likely.
If you know, if you think that the person
you're writing for, or the level you're pitching your
essay at or your assignment at is for someone
who you've perceived to be an expert, how much
of the knowledge you should be demonstrating in your
work are you gonna gloss over the fear of,
you know, patronizing the person you're writing for? So
that idea of the hindsight bias and the curse
of knowledge and knowing about these things and their
implications for the way you produce written work is
kind of really important. Um, AND the last thing
really, it's one of the things that, that ruins
many an essay or assignment, um, it is, is
a product of what we call the guru effect,
which is that we, we tend to assume that
things that are difficult to understand must be inherently
profound in some way or wise, um, uh, regardless
of if it actually makes any sense or not.
Um, AND there was a wonderful study about this
actually, that, um, that again used undergraduate students, psychology
undergraduate students, if memory serves correctly. And they gave
them a series of statements, and the statements were
manipulated for um whether they were profound or not.
So some of the statements were um things that
were just mundane, mundane but true, like, you know,
newborn babies require constant attention, you know, well done,
but yes, it's true. Um, AND another thing might
be, um, something that's, that's also true, but stated
a little bit more, um, a little bit less
directly. So a wet person does not fear the
white of the rain. So that's kind of a
degree of profundity in that knowledge. There's a little
of truth to it, it does make sense, but
it's been articulated in a less direct way. And
then, um, a third group of statements were just
sort of sway over profound bullshit that had been
generated from a site, um, that basically just uses
long words and scramble them up and, and makes
it so it sounds good. So an example would
be something like, um, wholeness quiets in the phenomena,
which, which sounds amazing, but actually is complete gibberish,
doesn't actually mean anything. And of course what you'd
hope is that the, you know, the intelligent and
diligent undergraduate students would be able to distinguish between
the, the profound, you know, sway over profound bullshit,
uh, profound statements and just mundane but true statements.
Uh, AND what they had found in this study
is that students would often rate the suede profound
bullshit statements as being profound. Um, SO again, it's
just that thing of when sometimes when things sound
complicated. Or sound sophisticated, we just tend to buy
into them without being critical. And the reason that
tends to be a problem in essays, and we've
all looked at articles online before and thought, my
God, is this person swallowed a theosaurus or something,
cos I don't understand a blooming word of this.
Um, BUT some people think that that's the way
to try and sound clever, that if you do
that when you're writing an essay, that the tutor
will be so impressed with your use of. Necessarily
complicated and sophisticated terminology, um they'll give you a
good mark, when actually research suggests that the opposite
is the case. Um, uh, THE thing, the thing
I always say to students is when you're writing
as an academic, regardless of some of the appalling
examples you see out there, always go for simplicity,
um, you know, always price simplicity and conciseness and
clarity over trying to sound good. So right there,
there's, there's kind of 4 psychological effects if you
like, or 4 biases and things like that, that
can really um interfere and undermine your writing that
I cover in that chapter, just to try and
warn students off them and try and improve their
writing at a stroke, um, regardless of, you know,
what type of assessment it is or or what
subject they're studying.
And of course, something that people have to do
in academia, not only as students, but then also
if they land an academic job of some kind
like a researcher, a professor, is that they have
to work collaboratively. But there are some challenges that
come with that. What would you say are perhaps
some of the biggest challenges and again, how do
they connect to effective studying?
Yeah, um, absolutely. I mean, it's one of those
things that's always perennially at the, the top of,
um, uh, you know, employers' wish list, isn't it,
the ability to work in a team and things
like that. So the challenges of working collaboratively in
academia are really no different than than working collaborativeatively
in any context, which is the, the problem is
that humans aren't as well geared up towards working
collaboratively as we like to think. Um, AND if
I. If I talk about the service social loafing
now, that will probably ring some bells and, and
all it really means is the more people you
put on a task, um, the less each of
those individuals involved in that task will contribute towards
the group, the the group goal. Um, SO their
individual effort will diminish the larger the group gets.
And this is probably due to something we'd, we'd
call sort of, you know, diffusion of responsibility, which
is that everyone starts to assume that someone else
will do it, um, as it were. But it's
also because people feel more anonymous in larger groups.
They feel less accountable for the work that they're
doing. Um, AND when people don't feel accountable, um,
they tend to put in less effort, basically. When
you know that you're gonna be held to account
for your efforts, um, you know, you, you generally
get on with it. But if you think you
can hide behind the group as a whole, you're
less inclined to kind of put the effort in.
And there's lots of research for about the last
50 or so years in, in social psychology to
that effect. Um, THE way around this, as, as
you might guess, is to try and increase the
accountability of each of the individual group members. Um,
SO one of the ways you can do that
is to have, like, peer evaluation, and you might
have seen this on, uh, on some assessments if
you, if you work in university or you are
a student, where each of the the group members
gets to rate the performance of other group members,
but throughout the task, not just at the end
of the task, cos it's. It's a bit late
to call someone, you know, good for nothing slacker
at the end of the task, cause it's done
and dusted then. Um, NOT that you should really
do that at any point in the task, but,
um, the evaluation should occur throughout the task. So,
cos it's then fair to someone, if they, if
they can then see that the group doesn't feel
like they're pulling their weight, they can elect to
do something about it. Um, AND it does sound
like a recipe for sort of pistols at dawn
in some ways. But if as a group you
can agree on the ground rules from the outset,
um, and you can agree on the criteria under
which people will be judged against in terms of
pulling their own weight, then it's actually a really
useful, um, thing to do, because often the, um,
the threat, for want of a better term, of
someone being kind of exposed as the person who's
letting the side down, um, in an environment is
enough to get people back on track and doing
their bit, as it were. So I, I think
that's the main challenge of working collaboratively in academia.
When you get group work tasks where it is
a collaborative effort and there isn't an individually assessed
component, you have to contrived ways of making sure
that each individual member of that group feels accountable
for their contribution. And I think that can be
quite difficult, but peer evaluation is probably a, a
kind of good way of going about it.
So, I have one more topic I would like
to ask you about, and then I have just
a final question that comes from a patron of
the show. So, the last topic is about presentations
and slide shows. I mean, of course, not all
presentations, not in all presentations, people. USE slide shows,
but in many of them, they use, they use
them nowadays. But what would you say are perhaps
the most common mistakes people make in presentations? And
what would you say are the most important ideas
for them to keep in mind when preparing a
presentation?
Yeah, well, I mean that that last point you
made there I think is, is the, the thing
you start with, because if you start with the
um, the understanding that in producing a presentation, your
goal is to make things easier for the audience
and not for yourself as a presenter. Then the
good practice will tend to spring naturally from that.
A lot of the mistakes you tend to get
people making when it comes to presentations are born
of the fact that they're nervous. You know, that
they're they're, they, they're not particularly confident, um, and
what they tend to do then is adjust the
nature of their presentation. So that they, um, their
slides, for example, become a crutch for them. So
if you've ever seen a slide and it's contained
about, you know, a mini essay on what, you
know, in, in 5 point font, and someone's reading
from the slide, they're not probably doing that to
be awkward, at least I hope they're not. Um,
THEY'RE probably doing it because they were frightened of
drying up. Um, BUT in doing that, what they,
what they've done is they've oriented the presentation in
such a way that makes it easier for them.
And in doing that, that's kind of made the
presentation less. Accessible and less appealing to the audience.
So if you just start off, um, when you're
thinking about giving a presentation saying, who are my
audience and how can I make this as easy
as possible for them, even if it makes life
a bit more uncomfortable for me, that's a good
start. Now, in terms of the kind of the
common ills, if you like, of presentations, um, the,
the one thing that people, the, the three things
that people do most commonly, and there's some research
by Stephen Collin about this that looked at PowerPoint
errors. And, and how frequently they're made and um
and how annoying they are to the audience. The
first one is common to all of us, which
is PowerPoint karaoke. And it's where you get a
speaker up the front and they either read pretty
much verbatim off of their slides or, um, off
of their notes, basically. And of course this does
beg the question of, well, if all you're gonna
do is read off your materials, you could really
just have sent us some materials and we could
have read it in the comfort of our own
homes. Um, THE point of a presentation is, is
you have to present, you are the focus of
attention. Um, SO that's the, the one of the
most common and one of the most annoying things
that people do. And really to get around that,
you've really got to start thinking about things like
multimedia principles, um, of, of, of good slide design.
So your slides become much more talking prompts. So
the idea is you, you have very little in
the way of words on the slides, but you
have a phrase that you can then elaborate on.
Um, AND that's much better than actually putting everything
you want to say on the slide for obvious
reasons. Um, THAT kind of relates to the second
thing that people tend to do wrong, which is
they, they incorporate unnecessary content into their slide. Um,
SO that each slide really should have a main
contention or a main focus. And if you start
putting too much information into a slide, what happens
is the, the point of that particular slide becomes
increasingly obscure and difficult for the audience to pick
up on. So, uh, and sometimes it happens because
people are just banging loads onto the slides because
they just think it's a value for money thing
and the more information they give to the reader,
the better. Um, BUT really, you should make sure
that that each part of your presentation, each slide,
however you want to break it up, has a
specific point, and that the only information you include,
um, is information that is relevant to perhaps substantiating
that point or to talking around that point. Um,
AND the other, the other mistake people often make
as well, which again is, is very highly related
to the first two. Is they just put too
much information on a slide to absorb, and it
might be relevant information, it might be, um, the
fact that they've used lots of bullet points, for
example, so it's not that they've tried to script
the entire presentation, but they've used like, you know,
20 bullet points, or they've used this horrendous diagram
with about 3 different sectors of sort of spider
web diagrams, and you just don't know where to
look first, your attention is completely overwhelmed. Uh, AND
you have to bear in mind that a big
part of your duty as a presenter is to
manage the cognitive load of the audience. You, you
don't want to give them so much information to
deal with that their short-term memory just goes. Sorry,
but too much, cos what happens then is they'll
just get bored and switch off. So whenever you're
thinking about slide and slide design, you really want
to limit the number of items on that slide
to, you know, let, let's say you, I would
say a good rule of thumb is sort of
no, no more than 5 really, cos I think
once you go beyond that, you're just putting too
much strain on people's working memory and it becomes
quite a chore for them to take that information
in and to retainer the parts of the slide
that are necessary. So, um, so those are the
three mistakes basically, and they are kind of quite
highly related. Um, BUT they all tend to come
from people being just, you know, they're not from
ill will or, um, sometimes they even ignorance, and
this is the interesting thing about the research that
Stephen Colson did. It's that sometimes people can recognize
errors in other presentations, but they go on to
make the same errors themselves in their own presentations.
And that probably is due to the fact that
it's one thing to know what an error is,
but that those errors are born from just being
a nervous presenter and designing slides for your benefit
rather than the audience's benefit.
So, let's then address the question from my patron,
Bernard Seyche. He asks, um, does going to college
make a big difference in a person's intelligence and
professional skills?
Um, WELL, it, it's, it would be a blanket
answer for me to say yes or no there,
wouldn't it, really? I, I think, particularly in, in,
in today's age, you, you need to be, you
need to be sure about why you're going to
college and, and what you want to get out
of it and how college figures in your overall
career plan. So I think one of the things
that I try and discourage students from doing is,
is going to college for the sake of it.
Um, YOU know, because they think that's what needs
to be done, or that's just what you have
to do to get any kind of half decent
job and things like that. Um, AND the reason
I discourage that is because if you really have
no interest in what you're studying, then you are
not going to be inclined to use some of
the, the more effective but more effortful methods of
studying that will produce the best results. Because the
one thing you really can't do if you, if
you want to get a, a good result um
out of a degree is to just kind of
phone it in, uh, just to do lots of
re-reading, lots of, you know, taking notes, verbatim, you
know, cramming for exams at the last minute. It's
gonna be a really unpleasant experience for you and
you just, you know, it's not really adding anything
to your life. So I think the first thing
is to understand how the course you're thinking of
studying is going to equip you, um, for the
future ahead. I think the the key thing is
to study what you're interested in, um, because there
are, if you engage with learning properly, there are
transferable things that we've been talking about through, you
know, through this, this show so far. Things like
teamwork, things like how to interrogate information, things like
how to become an ethical practitioner, things like how
to communicate clearly, that if you really engage with
studying effectively, um, these things will start to develop
irrespective of what subject you're taking. So there are
things to be gained from doing a degree across
the board, but I think the key thing is
to make sure that you're studying something that you
have an interest in, because that's what will, will
motivate you to, to invest time and effort in
the kind of the, the, the, you know, the
things that require, Um, effortful contributions, in other words,
the methods of studying that will, will challenge you,
will present you with the fact that you're not
getting it right immediately, um, and require you to
persist. And it's whether you're interested in what you're
learning or not, I think that is a big
determinant of that. So I think those are the
things that I that I would always encourage. So
is it worth it? Um, IT certainly can be,
um, but I think you need to understand, um,
what you're studying, how it kind of fits in
with what you want to do when you leave
college, and you need to engage with something that
you're really into. Enthusiastic about, so you can use
methods of studying that will, will challenge you and
will get the results that you want rather than
just kind of phone it in for the entire
3 years and end up with a fairly mediocre
degree, or, or God forbid a foul. Um, AND,
and it'll be a really unpleasant experience for you
as well.
Great. So, the book is again the psychology of
effective studying how to succeed in your degree. I'm
of course leaving a link to it in the
description of the interview and Doctor Pen, apart from
the book, would you like to let people know
where they can find you and the rest of
your work on the internet?
Yeah, certainly. Um, WELL, I mean, it, apart from
the book, I also have a YouTube channel. Um,
AND that contains, uh, advice on studying. Um, FOR
those of you that study psychology, it also has
guides to producing things like, you know, uh, lab
reports. Um, FOR those of you that don't study
psychology, it has lots of advice on how to
produce essays, uh, effectively from psychology. And it talks
about a lot of the things that we've been
discussing here about how to approach things like reading
and notes. Taking what you need to understand about
academic integrity. Um, BUT the channel was recently, uh,
expanded, um, to cover the applications of psychology beyond
just studying. So now I'm starting to talk about
things like, you know, why are people trolling, for
example, what motivates people to troll? How do, what
kind of strategies or psychology do shops use when
they're trying to persuade you to buy things in
the sale? How can you become more assertive and
say no without feeling bad about it? Um, I've
got one at the moment where I'm looking at
sort of, you know, bedtime procrastination and things like
that. So the channel now is called, uh, Presenting
Psychology. Um, SO, uh, and, and it, it really,
it encompasses both the studying material. So there's a
section for students, a playlist for students that contains
all the kind of videos we've talked about. But
there's also a section for everybody, people that are
just interested in the application of psychology and the
way it could perhaps just enhance their lives across
the board, um, as opposed to just make them
more effective learners. Um, THERE'S, there's lots of videos
on interesting subjects that have been submitted and, and
will be submitted in the future there too.
Thank you so much, Doctor Pen for coming on
the show and it's been a very fascinating conversation,
so thank you for
it. Thank you for having me. It's been wonderful
talking to you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asila dearraujuru and Roach Diego Londono Correa. Yannick
Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallidrianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry Franca Bartolotti
Gabrielon Scorteus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fitim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.